## Proposal for a REGULATION OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL on European data governance (Data Governance Act) (Text with EEA relevance)

THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION,

Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, and in particular Article 114 thereof,

Having regard to the proposal from the European Commission,

After transmission of the draft legislative act to the national parliaments,

Having regard to the opinion of the European Economic and Social Committee21,

Having regard to the opinion of the Committee of the Regions22,

Acting in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure,

Whereas:

(1) The Treaty on the functioning of the European Union (‘TFEU’) provides for the establishment of an internal market and the institution of a system ensuring that competition in the internal market is not distorted. The establishment of common rules and practices in the Member States relating to the development of a framework for data governance should contribute to the achievement of those objectives.

(2) Over the last few years, digital technologies have transformed the economy and society, affecting all sectors of activity and daily life. Data is at the centre of this transformation: data-driven innovation will bring enormous benefits for citizens and the economy, for example through improved personalised medicine, new mobility, and its contribution to the European Green Deal23. In its Data Strategy24, the Commission described the vision of a common European data space, a Single Market for data in which data could be used irrespective of its physical location of storage in the Union in compliance with applicable law. It also called for the free and safe flow of data with third countries, subject to exceptions and restrictions for public security, public order and other legitimate public policy objectives of the European Union, in line with international obligations. In order to turn that vision into reality, it proposes to establish domain- specific common European data spaces, as the concrete arrangements in which data sharing and data pooling can happen. As foreseen in that strategy, such common European data spaces can cover areas such as health, mobility, manufacturing, financial services, energy, or agriculture or thematic areas, such as the European green deal or European data spaces for public administration or skills, as well as a combination of these areas, e.g. energy and climate.

(3) It is necessary to improve the conditions for data sharing in the internal market, by creating a harmonised framework for data exchanges and laying down certain basic requirements for data governance. Sector-specific legislation can develop, adapt and propose new and complementary elements, depending on the specificities of the sector, such as the envisaged legislation on the European health data space25 and on access to vehicle data. Moreover, certain sectors of the economy are already regulated by sector-specific Union law that include rules relating to cross- border or Union wide sharing or access to data26. This Regulation should therefore be without prejudice to Directive (EU) 2016/943 of the European Parliament and of the Council (29), Regulation (EU) 2018/1807 of the European Parliament and of the Council (30), Regulation (EC) No 223/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council (31), Directive 2000/31/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (32), Directive 2001/29/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (33), Directive (EU) 2019/790 of the European Parliament and of the Council (34), Directive 2004/48/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (35), Directive (EU) 2019/1024 of the European Parliament and of the Council (36), as well as Regulation 2018/858/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council (37), Directive 2010/40/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council (38), Directive 2007/2/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council21, Directive (EU) 2017/1132 of the European Parliament and of the Council22, Directive (EU) 2015/849 of the European Parliament and of the Council23 and any other sector-specific Union legislation that organises the access to and re-use of data. This Regulation should be without prejudice to Union and national law on the access and use of data for the purpose of international cooperation in the context of prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties, as well as international cooperation in this context. This Regulation should be without prejudice to the competences of the Member States regarding activities concerning public security, defence and national security. Re-use of data protected for such reasons and held by public sector bodies is should not be covered by this Regulation. This should include data from procurement procedures falling within the scope of Directive 2009/81/EC. A horizontal regime for the re-use of certain categories of protected data held by public sector bodies, the provision of data intermediation services and of services based on data altruism in the Union should be established. Specific characteristics of different sectors may require the design of sectoral data-based systems, while building on the requirements of this Regulation. Where a sector-specific Union legal act requires public sector bodies, providers of data intermediation services or registered entities providing data altruism services to comply with specific additional technical, administrative or organisational requirements, including through an authorisation or certification regime, those provisions of that sector-specific Union legal act should also apply.

(3a) This Regulation is should be without prejudice to Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council, to Directive 2002/58/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council and Directive (EU) 2016/680 of the European Parliament and of the Council (24). This Regulation should in particular not be read as creating a new legal basis for the processing of personal data for any of the regulated activities, or as modifying information requirements under Regulation (EU) 2016/679. Its implementation should not prevent cross-border transfers of data in accordance with Chapter V of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 from taking place. In the event of conflict between the provisions of this Regulation and Union law or national law on the protection of personal data, the latter should prevail. Data protection authorities may be should be able to be competent authorities under this Regulation. Where other organisations function as competent authorities under this Regulation, it should be without prejudice to the supervisory powers and competences of data protection authorities under Regulation (EU) 2016/679. Where personal and non-personal data in a data set are inextricably linked, this Regulation should not prejudice the application of Regulation (EU) 2016/679.

(4) Action at Union level is necessary to increase trust in data sharing by establishing proper mechanisms for control by data subjects and data holders over the data that relates to them and in order to address othher barriers to a well-functioning data-driven economy and to create a Union-wide governance framework for data access, control and use, in particular regarding the re-use of certain types of data held by the public sector, the provision of services by data intermediation service providers to business users and to data subjects, as well as the collection and processing of data made available for altruistic purposes by natural and legal persons. This action should be without prejudice to obligations and commitments in the international trade agreements concluded by the Union.

(5) The idea that data that has been generated or controlled by public sector bodies or other entities at the expense of public budgets should benefit society has been part of Union policy for a long time. Directive (EU) 2019/1024 as well as sector-specific legislation ensure that the public sector makes more of the data it produces easily available for use and re-use. However, certain categories of data (commercially confidential data, data subject to statistical confidentiality, data protected by intellectual property rights of third parties, including trade secrets and personal data not accessible on the basis of specific national or Union legislation, such as Regulation (EU) 2016/679 and Directive (EU) 2016/680) in public databases is often not made available, not even for research or innovative activities. Due to the sensitivity of this data, certain technical and legal procedural requirements must be met before they are made available, in order to ensure the respect of rights others have over such data. Such requirements are usually time- and knowledge- intensive to fulfil. This has led to the underutilisation of such data. While some Member States are setting up structures, processes and sometimes legislate to facilitate this type of re-use, this is not the case across the Union.

(6) There are techniques enabling privacy-friendly analyses on databases that contain personal data, such as anonymisation, differential privacy, generalisation, or suppression and randomisation, use of synthetic data or other such methods. Application of these privacy- enhancing technologies, together with comprehensive data protection approaches, in line with the rules on personal data processing, should ensure the safe re-use of certain categories of protected data, for example personal data and commercially confidential business data for research, innovation and statistical purposes. In many cases this implies that the data use and re-use in this context can only be done in a secure processing environment set in place and supervised by the public sector. There is experience at Union level with such secure processing environments that are used for research on statistical microdata on the basis of Commission Regulation (EU) 557/2013 (39). The public sector body should be able to impose a condition whereby the re-use is restricted to machine-processing of data or to processing with limited human involvement. Insofar as personal data are concerned, the processing of personal data should rely upon one or more of the grounds for processing provided in Articles 6 and 9 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679.

(7) The categories of data held by public sector bodies which should be subject to re-use under this Regulation fall outside the scope of Directive (EU) 2019/1024 that excludes data which is not accessible due to commercial and statistical confidentiality and data that is included in works or other subject matter over third parties have intellectual property rights. Commercially confidential data includes data protected by trade secrets, protected know-how and any other information the undue disclosure of which would have an impact on the market position or financial health of the business. This Regulation should apply to personal data that fall outside the scope of Directive (EU) 2019/1024 insofar as the access regime excludes or restricts access to such data for reasons of data protection, privacy and the integrity of the individual, in particular in accordance with data protection rules. The re-use of data, which may contain trade secrets, should take place without prejudice to Directive (EU) 2016/94340, which sets the framework for the lawful acquisition, use or disclosure of trade secrets. This Regulation should not create an obligation to allow re-use of public sector data. In particular, each Member State should therefore be able to decide whether data is made accessible for re-use, also in terms of the purposes and scope of such access. It should be without prejudice and complementary to more specific obligations on public sector bodies to allow re-use of data laid down in sector- specific Union or national law. Public access to official documents may be considered to be in the public interest. Taking into account the role of public access to official documents and transparency in a democratic society, this Regulation is also without prejudice to national law on granting access to and disclosing official documents. Access to official documents may in particular be granted in accordance with national law without imposing specific conditions or by imposing specific conditions that are not provided by this Regulation.

(8) The re-use regime provided for in this Regulation should apply to data the supply of which forms part of the public tasks of the public sector bodies concerned, as defined by law or by other binding rules in the Member States. In the absence of such rules the public tasks should be defined in accordance with common administrative practice in the Member States, provided that the scope of the public tasks is transparent and subject to review. The public tasks could be defined generally or on a case-by-case basis for individual public sector bodies. As public undertakings are not covered by the definition of public sector body, the data they hold should not be subject to this Regulation. Data held by cultural establishment, such as libraries, archives and museums, as well as orchestras, operas, ballets, and theatres, and educational establishments should not be covered by this Regulation since the works and other documents they hold are predominantly covered by third party intellectual property rights. Research performing organisations and research funding organisations could also be organised as public sector bodies and/or bodies governed by public law. This Regulation should apply to such hybrid organisations only in their capacity as research performing organisations. If such a research performing organisation holds data as a part of a specific public-private association with private sector organisations or other public bodies, bodies governed by public law or hybrid research performing organisations (i.e. organised as both public sector bodies or public undertakings) with the main purpose of pursuing research, these data should also not be covered by this Regulation. Where relevant, Member States should be able to apply the requirements of this Regulation to public undertakings or private undertakings, such as those that exercise public sector duties or provide services of general interest. The exchange of data among public sector bodies, or between public sector bodies and public sector bodies in third countries or international organizations, purely in pursuit of their public tasks, including the exchange of data between researchers for non-commercial scientific research purposes, should not be subject to the provisions of this Regulation concerning the re-use of certain categories of protected data held by public sector bodies.

(9) Public sector bodies should comply with competition law when establishing the principles for re-use of data they hold, avoiding as far as possible the conclusion of agreements, which might have as their objective or effect the creation of exclusive rights for the re-use of certain data. Such agreement should be only possible when justified and necessary for the provision of a service of general interest. This may be the case when exclusive use of the data is the only way to maximise the societal benefits of the data in question, for example where there is only one entity (which has specialised in the processing of a specific dataset) capable of delivering the service or the product which allows the public sector body to provide an advanced digital service in the general interest. Such arrangements should, however, be concluded in compliance with public procurement rules and be subject to regular review based on a market analysis in order to ascertain whether such exclusivity continues to be necessary. In addition, such arrangements should comply with the relevant State aid rules, as appropriate, and should be concluded for a limited period, which should not exceed three years. In order to ensure transparency, such exclusive agreements should be published online, in a form that is in accordance with Union law on public procurement, where relevant. Where an exclusive right to re-use data does not meet the conditions set out in this Regulation, the exclusive right should be invalid.

(10) Prohibited exclusive agreements and other practices or arrangements between data subjects and data holders on the one hand, and data re-users on the other hand, which do not expressly grant exclusive rights but which can reasonably be expected to restrict the availability of data for re-use that have been concluded or have been already in place before the entry into force of this Regulation should not be renewed after the expiration of their term. In the case of indefinite or longer-term agreements, they should be terminated within three years from the date of entry into force of this Regulation.

(11) Conditions for re-use of protected data that apply to public sector bodies, which are designated as competent under national law to allow re-use, and which should be without prejudice to rights or obligations concerning access to such data, should be laid down. Those conditions should be non-discriminatory, proportionate and objectively justified, while not restricting competition. The conditions for re-use should be designed in a manner promoting scientific research, e.g. privileging research should be considered non-discriminatory. Public sector bodies allowing re-use should have in place the technical means necessary to ensure the protection of rights and interests of third parties. Conditions attached to the re-use of data should be limited to what is necessary to preserve the rights and interests of others in the data and the integrity of the information technology and communication systems of the public sector bodies. Public sector bodies should apply conditions which best serve the interests of the re- user without leading to a disproportionate burden for the public sector. Depending on the case at hand, before its transmission, personal data should be fully anonymised, so as to definitively not allow the identification of the data subjects, or data containing commercially confidential information modified in such a way that no confidential information is disclosed. Alternatively, on-premise or remote re-use of the data, for example pseudonymised data, within a secure processing environment could be permitted. Data analyses in such secure processing environments should be supervised by the public sector body, so as to protect the rights and interests of others. In particular, personal data should only be transmitted for re-use to a third party where a legal basis under data protection legislation allows such transmission. This should also apply to pseudonymised data which remain personal data within the meaning of Regulation (EU) 2016/679. In the event of reidentification of data subjects, the obligation to notify such a data breach to the public sector body should apply in addition to the obligation to notify such a data breach to a supervisory authority and to the data subject in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2016/679. The public sector bodies, where relevant, should facilitate the re-use of data on the basis of consent of data subjects or permissions of legal persons on the re-use of data pertaining to them through adequate technical means. In this respect, the public sector body could provide assistance to potential re-users in seeking such consent by establishing technical mechanisms that permit transmitting requests for consent from re-users, where practically feasible. No contact information should be given that allows re-users to contact data subjects or data holders directly. When transmitting the request to consent, the public sector body should ensure that the data subject is clearly informed of the possibility to refuse such a request.

(12) The intellectual property rights of third parties should not be affected by this Regulation. This Regulation should neither affect the existence or ownership of intellectual property rights of public sector bodies, nor should it limit the exercise of these rights in any way. The obligations imposed in accordance with this Regulation should apply only insofar as they are compatible with international agreements on the protection of intellectual property rights, in particular the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works (Berne Convention), the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS Agreement) and the WIPO Copyright Treaty (WCT) and Union or national law governing intellectual property. Public sector bodies should, however, exercise their copyright in a way that facilitates re-use.

(13) Data subject to intellectual property rights as well as trade secrets should only be transmitted to a third party where such transmission is lawful by virtue of Union or national law or with the agreement of the rightholder. Where public sector bodies are holders of the right provided for in Article 7(1) of Directive 96/9/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (41) they should not exercise that right in order to prevent the re-use of data or to restrict re-use beyond the limits set by this Regulation.

(14) Companies and data subjects should be able to trust that the re-use of certain categories of protected data, which are held by the public sector, will take place in a manner that respects their rights and interests. Additional safeguards should thus be put in place for situations in which the re-use of such public sector data is taking place on the basis of a processing of the data outside the public sector. Such an additional safeguard could be found in the requirement that public sector bodies should take fully into account the rights and interests of natural and legal persons (in particular the protection of personal data, commercially sensitive data and the protection of intellectual property rights) in case such data is transferred to third countries.

(15) Furthermore, it is important to safeguard protected data of non-personal nature, notably trade secrets, but also non-personal data representing content protected by intellectual property rights from unlawful access that may lead to IP theft or industrial espionage. In order to ensure the protection of fundamental rights or interests of data subjects and data holders, non-personal data which is to be protected from unlawful or unauthorised access under Union or national law, and which is held by public sector bodies, can be transferred to third-countries only when appropriate safeguards for the use of data are provided. Such appropriate safeguards should include the public sector body only transmitting protected data to a re-user, if the re-user undertakes obligations in the interest of the protection of the data. The re-user that intends to transfer the data to such third country should commit to comply with the obligations laid out in this Regulation even after the data has been transferred to the third country. To ensure the proper enforcement of such obligations, the re-user should also accept the jurisdiction of the Member State of the public sector body that allowed the re-use for the judicial settlement of disputes. In addition, the public sector body and the re-user may rely on model contractual clauses adopted by the Commission.

(16) Appropriate safeguards should also be considered to be implemented when in that third-country there are equivalent measures in place which ensure that non-personal data benefits from a level of protection similar to that applicable by means of Union law in particular as regards the protection of trade secrets and the protection of intellectual property rights. To that end, the Commission may adopt implementing acts, when justified by a substantial number of requests, across the Union, concerning the re-use of non-personal data in specific third countries, that declare that a third country provides a level of protection that is essentially equivalent to those provided by Union or national law. The Commission should assess the necessity of the adoption of such implementing acts based on the information provided by the Member States through the European Data Innovation Board. Such implementing acts would reassure public sector bodies that re-use of publicly held data in the concerned third-country would not compromise the protected nature of the data. The assessment of the level of protection afforded in such third-country should, in particular, take into consideration the relevant legislation, both general and sectoral, including on public security, defence, national security and criminal law concerning the access to and protection of non-personal data, any access by the public authorities of that third country to the data transferred, the existence and effective functioning of one or more independent supervisory authorities in the third country with responsibility for ensuring and enforcing compliance with the legal regime ensuring access to such data, or the third countries’ international commitments regarding the protection of data the third country concerned has entered into, or other obligations arising from legally binding conventions or instruments as well as from its participation in multilateral or regional systems. The existence of effective legal remedies for data subjects and data holders, public sector bodies or data intermediation service providers in the third country concerned is of particular importance in the context of the transfer of non- personal data to that third country. Such safeguards should therefore include the availability of enforceable rights and of effective legal remedies. Such implementing acts are without prejudice to any legal obligation or contractual arrangements already undertaken by a re-user in the interest of the protection of non-personal data, in particular industrial data, and to the public sector bodies' right to oblige re-users to comply with conditions for re-use, in accordance with this Regulation.

(17) Some third countries adopt laws, regulations and other legal acts which aim at directly transferring or providing governmental access to non-personal data in the Union under the control of natural and legal persons under the jurisdiction of the Member States. Judgments of courts or tribunals or decisions of administrative authorities in third countries requiring such transfer or access to non-personal data should be enforceable when based on an international agreement, such as a mutual legal assistance treaty, in force between the requesting third country and the Union or a Member State. In some cases, situations may arise where the obligation to transfer or provide access to non-personal data arising from a third country law conflicts with a competing obligation to protect such data under Union or national law, in particular as regards the protection of fundamental rights of the individual or the fundamental interests of a Member State related to national security or defence, the protection of commercially sensitive data and the protection of intellectual property rights, and including its contractual undertakings regarding confidentiality in accordance with such law. In the absence of international agreements regulating such matters, transfer or access should only be allowed under certain conditions, in particular adter verifying that the third-country's legal system requires the reasons and proportionality of the decision to be set out, that the court order or the decision is specific in character, and the reasoned objection of the addressee is subject to a review by a competent court in the third country, which is empowered to take duly into account the relevant legal interests of the provider of such data. Moreover, public sector bodies, natural or legal persons to which the right to re-use data was granted, data intermediation service providers and entities entered in the register of recognised data altruism organisations should ensure, when signing contractual agreements with other private parties, that non-personal data held in the Union are only accessed in or transferred to third countries in compliance with the law of the Union or the law of the relevant Member State.

(18a) To foster further trust in the data economy of the Union, it is essential that the safeguards in relation to Union citizens, the public sector and businesses that ensure that control over their strategic and sensitive data are implemented and that Union law, values and standards are upheld in terms of , but not limited to, security, data protection and consumer protection. In order to prevent unlawful access to non-personal data, public sector bodies, natural or legal persons to which the right to re-use data was granted, data intermediation service providers and entities entered in a national register of recognised data altruism organisations should take all reasonable measures to prevent access to the systems where non-personal data is stored, including encryption of data or corporate policies. To these ends, it has to be ensured that public sector bodies, natural or legal persons to which the right to re-use data was granted, data intermediation service providers and entities entered in the register of recognized data altruism organisations should adhere to all relevant technical standards, codes of conduct and certifications at Union level.

(19) In order to build trust in re-use mechanisms, it may be necessary to attach stricter conditions for certain types of non-personal data that may be identified as highly sensitive in future specific Union acts adopted in accordance with a legislative proceudre, as regards the transfer to third countries, if such transfer could jeopardise public policy objectives, in line with international commitments. For example, in the health domain, certain datasets held by actors in the public health system, such as public hospitals, could be identified as highly sensitive health data. Other relevant sectors could be transport, energy, environment and finance. In order to ensure harmonised practices across the Union, such types of highly sensitive non-personal public data should be defined by Union law, for example in the context of the European Health Data Space or other sectoral legislation. The conditions attached to the transfer of such data to third countries should be laid down in implementing acts. Conditions should be proportionate, non-discriminatory and necessary to protect legitimate public policy objectives identified, such as the protection of public health, safety, the environment, public morals, consumer protection, privacy and personal data protection. The conditions should correspond to the risks identified in relation to the sensitivity of such data, including in terms of the risk of the re- identification of individuals. These conditions could include terms applicable for the transfer or technical arrangements, such as the requirement of using a secure processing environment, limitations as regards the re-use of data in third-countries or categories of persons which are entitled to transfer such data to third countries or who can access the data in the third country. In exceptional cases they could also include restrictions on transfer of the data to third countries to protect the public interest.

(20) Public sector bodies should be able to charge fees for the re-use of data but should also be able to decide to allow re-use at lower or no cost, for example for certain categories of re-uses such as non-commercial re-use for scientific research purposes, or re-use by small and medium- sized enterprises, so as to incentivise such re-use in order to stimulate research and innovation and support companies that are an important source of innovation and typically find it more difficult to collect relevant data themselves, in line with State aid rules. In this specific context, scientific research purposes should be understood to include any type of research related purpose regardless of the organizational or financial structure of the research institution in question, with the exception of research that is being conducted by a company aiming exclusively at the development, enhancement or optimisation of products or services. Such fees should be reasonable, transparent, published online and non- discriminatory.

(21) In order to incentivise the re-use of these categories of data, Member States should establish a single information point to act as an interface for re-users that seek to re-use such data held by the public sector bodies. It should have a cross-sector remit, and should complement, if necessary, arrangements at the sectoral level. The single information point should be able to rely on automated means when transmitting enquiries or requests for the re-use. Sufficient human oversight should be ensured in the transmission process. Already existing practical arrangements such as Open Data Portals could be used for this purpose. It should have an asset list containing all available data sources, including, where relevant, those available at sectoral, regional and local information points, with relevant information describing the data. In addition, Member States should designate, establish or facilitate the establishment of competent bodies to support the activities of public sector bodies allowing re-use of certain categories of protected data. Their tasks may include granting access to data, where mandated in sectoral Union or Member States legislation. Those competent bodies should provide support to public sector bodies with state-of-the-art techniques, including secure data processing environments, which allow data analysis in a manner that preserves the privacy of the information. Such support structure could support the data subjects and data holders with management of the consent or permission to re-use, including consent to certain areas of scientific research when in keeping with recognised ethical standards for scientific research. The competent bodies should not have a supervisory function, which is reserved for supervisory authorities under Regulation (EU) 2016/679. Without prejudice to the supervisory powers of data protection authorities, data processing should be performed under the responsibility of the public sector body responsible for the register containing the data, who remains a data controller within the meaning of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 insofar as personal data are concerned. Member States may have in place one or several competent bodies, which could act in different sectors. Internal services of public sector bodies could act as competent bodies. A competent body can be a public sector body supporting other public sector bodies in allowing re-use of data, where relevant, or a public sector body allowing re-use itself. Supporting other public sector bodies entails informing them, upon request, about best practices on how to fulfil the requirements established by this Regulation such as the technical means to make a secure processing environment available or the technical means to ensure privacy and confidentiality when providing access to data within the scope of this Regulation.

(22) Providers of data intermediation services (data intermediaries) are expected to play a key role in the data economy, in particular in supporting and promoting voluntary data sharing practices between companies or facilitating data sharing obligations set by Union or national law. They could become a tool to facilitate the aggregation and exchange of substantial amounts of relevant data. Data intermediaries offering services that connect the different actors have the potential to contribute to the efficient pooling of data as well as to the facilitation of bilateral data sharing. Specialised data intermediaries that are independent from both data subjects and data holders, and from data users could have a facilitating role in the emergence of new data-driven ecosystems independent from any player with a significant degree of market power. This will be particularly important in the context of the establishment of common European data spaces. Such data spaces could require an entity to structure and organise (‘orchestrate’) such data spaces. Data intermediation services could include inter alia bilateral or multilateral sharing of data or the creation of platforms or databases enabling the sharing or joint use of data, as well as the establishment of a specific infrastructure for the interconnection of data holders, data subjects and data users.

(22a) This Regulation should only cover entities that provide information society services within the meaning of Article 1(1)b) of Directive (EU) 2015/1535 and which have as a main objective the establishment of direct legal or business relationships, or both between data subjects and data holders, on the one hand, and potential users on the other hand, and assist both parties in a transaction of data assets between the two. This would include, inter alia, data marketplaces on which companies could publish information on data the use of which they would be willing to license to others, ecosystem orchestrators that ensure the proper functioning of data sharing ecosystems that are open to all interested parties, for instance in the context of common European data spaces, as well as data pools established jointly by several companies with the intention to license the use of such pool to all interested parties in a manner that all companies contributing to the pool would receive direct reward for their contribution to the pool. This would exclude service providers that obtain data from data subjects and data holders, aggregate, enrich or transform the data and licence the use of the resulting data to data users, without establishing a direct legal or business relationship between data subjects and data holders, on the one hand, and data users on the other hand, for example advertisement or data brokers, data consultancies, providers of data products resulting from value added to the data by the service provider. This Regulation should only cover services aiming at intermediating between an undefined number of data subjects and data holers, on the one hand, and data users on the other hand, inter alia situations where the data intermediation service is provided to all interested parties. This would be exluding data intermediation services that are meant to be used by a closed group of data subjects and data holders, and users, i.e. a situation where a data sharing service was set up for a definite number of data subjects, data holders and data users, and access to such service is dependent on the agreement by the members of the group. In such closed arrangements, there is sufficient trust of the parties in the service provider that is used for the sharing of data. The provision of cloud infrastructure, or of data sharing software, the provision of web browsers or browser plug-ins, or an email service should not be considered data intermediation services in the sense of this Regulation as such services only provide technical tools for data subjects or data holders to share data with others, but are neither aiming to establish a direct legal or business relationship between them and data users, nor are through the provision of such acquiring any information on the establishment of such relationship. Data intermediation service providers should be allowed to offer certain services, e.g. makinge adaptations to the data exchanged, to the extent that such services are intrinsically linked with the sharing of the data and that this improves the usability of the data by the data user, where the data user desires this, such as to convert it into specific formats. In addition, services that focus on the intermediation of content, in particular on copyright-protected content, such as online content sharing service providers in the meaning of Article 2(6) of Directive (EU) 2019/790 should not be covered by this Regulation. Data exchange platforms that are exclusively used by one data holder in order to enable the use of data they hold as well as platforms, developed and exclusively offered by manufacturers of objects and devices connected to the Internet-of-Things, which have as their main objective to ensure functionalities of the connected object or device and to allow value added services, should not be covered by this Regulation. ‘Consolidated tape providers’ as defined in Article 4 (1) point 53 of Directive 2014/65/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council28 fall outside the scope of the definition of data intermediation services. Additionally, ‘account information service providers’ as defined in Article 4 point 19 of Directive (EU) 2015/2366 of the European Parliament and of the Council29 should not be considered as data intermediation service providers for the purposes of this Regulation. Public sector bodies that offer data intermediation services on a non-commercial basis are not covered by Chapter III of this Regulation. Member States may determine whether public sector bodies can provide data intermediation services on a commercial basis. Entities which restrict their activities to facilitating use of data made available on the basis of data altruism and that operate on a not-for-profit basis should not be covered by Chapter III of this Regulation, as this activity serves objectives of general interest by increasing the volume of data available for such purposes.

(23) A specific category of data intermediaries includes providers of data intermediation services that offer their services to data subjects within the of Regulation (EU) 2016/679. Such providers seek to enhance individual agency, and in particular the individuals’ control over the data relating to them. They would assist individuals in exercising their rights under Regulation (EU) 2016/679, in particular managing their consent to data processing, the right of access to their own data, the right to the rectification of inaccurate personal data, the right of erasure or right ‘to be forgotten’, the right to restrict processing and the data portability right, which allows data subjects to move their personal data from one controller to the other. In this context, it is important that their business model ensures that there are no misaligned incentives that encourage individuals to use such services to make more data relating to them available for processing than what is in the individuals’ own interest. This could include advising individuals on uses of their data they could allow and making due diligence checks on data users before allowing them to contact data subjects, in order to avoid fraudulent practices. In certain situations, it could be desirable to collate actual data within a personal data storage space, or ‘personal data space’ so that processing can happen within that space without personal data being transmitted to third parties in order to maximise the protection of personal data and privacy. Such ‘personal data spaces’ may contain static personal data such as name, address or date of birth as well as dynamic data that an individual generates e.g. through the use of an online service or an object connected to the Internet-of-Things. They may also be used to store verified identity information (passport number, social security information) as well as proof of personal attributes (e.g. driving licence, diplomas or bank account information).

(24) Data cooperatives seek to strengthen the position of individuals in making informed choices before consenting to data use, influencing the terms and conditions of data user organisations attached to data use or potentially solving disputes between members of a group on how data can be used when such data pertain to several data subjects within that group. In this context it is important to acknowledge that the rights under Regulation (EU) 2016/679 are personal rights of the data subject and that data subjects cannot relinquish such rights. Data cooperatives could also provide a useful means for one-person companies, micro, small and medium-sized enterprises that in terms of knowledge of data sharing, are often comparable to individuals.

(25) In order to increase trust in such data intermediation services, in particular related to the use of data and the compliance with the conditions imposed by data subjects and data holders, it is necessary to create a Union-level regulatory framework, which would set out highly harmonised requirements related to the trustworthy provision of such data intermediation services, and which is implemented by the national competent authorities. This will contribute to ensuring that data subjects and data holders, as well as data users have better control over the access to and use of their data, in accordance with Union law. The Commission could also encourage and facilitate the development of self-regulatory codes of conduct at Union level, involving relevant stakeholders, in particular on interoperability. Both in situations where data sharing occurs in a business-to-business context and where it occurs in a business-to-consumer context, data intermediation service providers should offer a novel, ‘European’ way of data governance, by providing a separation in the data economy between data provision, intermediation and use. Providers of data intermediation services could also make available specific technical infrastructure for the interconnection of data subjects and data holders with data users.

(26) A key element to bring trust in data intermediation services and more control for data subjects and data holders, as well as for and data users is the neutrality of data intermediation service providers as regards the data exchanged between data subjects and data holders, on the one hand, and data users on the other hand. It is therefore necessary that data intermediation service providers act only as intermediaries in the transactions, and do not use the data exchanged for any other purpose. This will also require structural separation between the data intermediation service and any other services provided, so as to avoid issues of conflict of interest. This means that the data intermediation service should be provided through a legal person that is separate from the other activities of that data intermediation service provider. As an exception to this, the data intermediation service providers should be able to use the data provided by the data holder for the improvement of their data intermediation services. In addition to that the providers could offer additional specific services to improve the usability of the data and ancillary services that facilitate the sharing of data, such as storage, curation, pseudonymisation and anonymisation. Data intermediation service providers that intermediate the exchange of data between individuals as data subjects and legal entities as data users should, in addition, bear fiduciary duty towards the individuals, to ensure that they act in the best interest of the data subjects. Questions of liability for all material and immaterial damages and detriments resulting from any conduct of the data intermediation service provider could be addressed in the relevant contract, based on the national liability regimes.

(26a) Data intermediation service providers should take reasonable measures to ensure interoperability within a sector and between different sectors to ensure the proper functioning of the market. Reasonable measures could include following the existing, commonly-used standards in the sector where the data service provider operates. The European Data Innovation Board should facilitate the emergence of additional industry standards, where necessary. Data intermediation service providers should implement in due time the measures for interoperability between the data intermediation services set out by the European Data Innovation Board.

(27) In order to ensure the compliance of the providers of data intermediation services with the conditions set out in this Regulation, such providers should have a place of establishment in the Union. Alternatively, where a provider of data intermediation services not established in the Union offers services within the Union, it should designate a representative. Designation of a representative is necessary, given that such providers of data intermediation services handle personal data as well as commercially confidential data, which necessitates the close monitoring of the compliance of such service providers with the conditions laid out in this Regulation. In order to determine whether such a provider of data intermediation services is offering services within the Union, it should be ascertained whether it is apparent that the provider of data intermediation services is planning to offer services to persons in one or more Member States. The mere accessibility in the Union of the website or of an email address and of other contact details of the provider of data intermediation services, or the use of a language generally used in the third country where the provider of data sharing services is established, should be considered insufficient to ascertain such an intention. However, factors such as the use of a language or a currency generally used in one or more Member States with the possibility of ordering services in that other language, or the mentioning of users who are in the Union, could make it apparent that the provider of data intermediation services is planning to offer services within the Union. The representative should act on behalf of the provider of data intermediation services and it should be possible for competent authorities to contact the representative. The representative should be designated by a written mandate of the provider of data intermediation services to act on the latter's behalf with regard to the latter's obligations under this Regulation.

(28) This Regulation should be without prejudice to the obligation of providers of data intermediation services to comply with Regulation (EU) 2016/679 and the responsibility of supervisory authorities to ensure compliance with that Regulation. When providers of data intermediation services process personal data, this Regulation does not affect the protection of personal data. Where the data intermediation service providers are data controllers or processors as defined in Regulation (EU) 2016/679 they are bound by the rules of that Regulation.

(29) This Regulation should be also without prejudice to the application of competition law. Providers of data intermediation services should also take measures to ensure compliance with competition law and have procedures in place to this effect. Data sharing could generate various types of efficiencies but could also lead to restrictions of competition, in particular where it includes the sharing of competitively sensitive information. This applies in particular in situations where data sharing enables businesses to become aware of market strategies of their actual or potential competitors. Competitively sensitive information typically includes information on customer data, future prices, production costs, quantities, turnovers, sales or capacities.

(30) A notification procedure for data intermediation services should be established in order to ensure a data governance within the Union based on trustworthy exchange of data. The benefits of a trustworthy environment would be best achieved by imposing a number of requirements for the provision of data intermediation services, but without requiring any explicit decision or administrative act by the competent authority for the provision of such services.

(31) In order to support effective cross-border provision of services, the data intermediation service provider should be requested to send a notification only to the designated competent authority from the Member State where its main establishment is located or where its legal representative is located. Such a notification should not entail more than a mere declaration of the intention to provide such services and should be completed only by the information set out in this Regulation.

(32) The main establishment of a provider of data intermediation services in the Union should be the Member State with the place of its central administration in the Union. The main establishment of a provider of data intermediation services in the Union should be determined according to objective criteria and should imply the effective and real exercise of management activities. Activities of a provider of data intermediation services should also be in line with national law of the Member State in which it has its main establishment.

(33) The competent authorities designated to monitor compliance of data intermediation services with the requirements in this Regulation should be chosen on the basis of their capacity and expertise regarding horizontal or sectoral data sharing, and they should be independent of any provider of data intermediation services as well as transparent and impartial in the exercise of their tasks. Member States should notify the Commission of the identity of the designated competent authorities. The powers and competences of the designated competent authorities should be without prejudice to the powers of the data protection authorities. In particular, for any question requiring an assessment of compliance with Regulation (EU) 2016/679, the competent authority should seek, where relevant, an opinion or decision by the competent supervisory authority established pursuant to that Regulation.

(34) The notification framework laid down in this Regulation should be without prejudice to specific additional rules for the provision of data intermediation services applicable by means of sector-specific legislation.

(35) There is a strong potential in the use of data made available voluntarily by data subjects based on their informed consent or, where it concerns non-personal data, made available by legal persons, for objectives of general interest. Such objectives would include healthcare, combating climate change, improving mobility,

facilitating the development, production and dissemination of European statistics or improving the provision of public services. Support to scientific research, including for example technological development and demonstration, fundamental research, applied research and privately funded research, should be considered as well objectives of general interest. This Regulation should aim at contributing to the emergence of pools of data made available on the basis of data altruism that have a sufficient size in order to enable data analytics and machine learning, including across borders in the Union. In order to achieve this objective, Member States could have organizational or technical arrangements in place, which would facilitate data altruism. Such arrangements could include the availability of easily useable tools for data subjects or data holders for giving consent or permission for the altruistic use of their data, the organization of awareness campaigns, or a structured exchange between public authorities on how public policies benefit from data altruism (e.g. improving traffic, public health, combating climate change). In support of this, Member States could also define national policies for data altruism. Data subjects should be able to receive compensation related only to the costs they incur making their data available for objectives of general interest.

(36) Legal entities that seek to support objectives of general interest by making available relevant data based on data altruism at scale and meet certain requirements, should be able to register as ‘Data Altruism Organisations recognised in the Union’. This could lead to the establishment of data repositories. As registration in a Member State would be valid across the Union, and this should facilitate cross-border data use within the Union and the emergence of data pools covering several Member States. Data subjects in this respect would consent to specific purposes of data processing, but could also consent to data processing in certain areas of research or parts of research projects as it is often not possible to fully identify the purpose of personal data processing for scientific research purposes at the time of data collection. Legal persons could give permission to the processing of their non-personal data for a range of purposes not defined at the moment of giving the permission. The compliance of such registered entities with a set of requirements should bring trust that the data made available on altruistic purposes is serving a general interest purpose. Such trust should result in particular from a place of establishment or a legal representative within the Union, as well as from the requirement that registered entities have a not-for-profit character, from transparency requirements and from specific safeguards in place to protect rights and interests of data subjects and companies. Further safeguards should include making it possible to process relevant data within a secure processing environment operated by the registered entity, oversight mechanisms such as ethics councils or boards to ensure that the data controller maintains high standards of scientific ethics, effective technical means to withdraw or modify consent at any moment, based on the information obligations of data processors under Regulation (EU) 2016/679 as well as means for data subjects to stay informed about the use of data they made available. Registration as a recognised data altruism organisation should not be a precondition for exercising data altruism activities. The Commission should, by way of implementing acts, adopt codes of conduct developed in close cooperation with data altruism organisations and relevant stakeholders, making compliance with those codes a requirement for registration as a recognised data altruism organisations in accordance with this Regulation.

(37) This Regulation is without prejudice to the establishment, organisation and functioning of entities that seek to engage in data altruism pursuant to national law. It builds on national law requirements to operate lawfully in a Member State as a not- for-profit organisation. Entities which meet the requirements of this Regulation should be able to use the title of ‘Data Altruism Organisations recognised in the Union’.

(38) Data Altruism Organisations recognised in the Union should be able to collect relevant data directly from natural and legal persons or to process data collected by others. Data altruism organisations may process the collected data for purposes which they define themselves or permit the processing by third parties. Where recognised data altruism organisations are data controllers or processors within the meaning of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 they are bound by the rules of that Regulation. Typically, data altruism would rely on consent of data subjects in the sense of Article 6(1)(a) and 9(2)(a) of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 that should be in compliance with requirements for lawful consent in accordance with Article 7 of that Regulation. In accordance with Regulation (EU) 2016/679, scientific research purposes can be supported by consent to certain areas of scientific research when in keeping with recognised ethical standards for scientific research or only to certain areas of research or parts of research projects. Article 5(1)(b) of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 specifies that further processing for scientific or historical research purposes or statistical purposes should, in accordance with Article 89(1) of Regulation (EU) 2016/679, not be considered to be incompatible with the initial purposes. For non-personal data the usage limitations should be found in the permission given by the data holder.

(38a) The competent authorities designated to monitor compliance of recognised data altruism organisations with the requirements of this Regulation should be chosen on the basis of their capacity and expertise, and they should be independent of any data altruism organisation as well as transparent and impartial in the exercise of their tasks. Member States should notify the Commission of the identity of the designated competent authorities. The powers and competences of the designated competent authorities should be without prejudice to the powers of the data protection authorities. In particular, for any question requiring an assessment of compliance with Regulation (EU) 2016/679, the competent authority should seek, where relevant, an opinion or decision by the competent supervisory authority established pursuant to that Regulation.

(39) To bring additional legal certainty to granting and withdrawing of consent, in particular in the context of scientific research and statistical use of data made available on an altruistic basis, a European data altruism consent form should be developed and used in the context of altruistic data sharing. Such a form should contribute to additional transparency for data subjects that their data will be accessed and used in accordance with their consent and also in full compliance with the data protection rules. It could also be used to streamline data altruism performed by companies and provide a mechanism allowing such companies to withdraw their permission to use the data. In order to take into account the specificities of individual sectors, including from a data protection perspective, there should be a possibility for sectoral adjustments of the European data altruism consent form.

(40) In order to successfully implement the data governance framework, a European Data Innovation Board should be established, in the form of an expert group. The Board should consist of representatives of the Member States, the Commission and representatives of relevant data spaces and specific sectors (such as health, environment, agriculture and transport), as well as representatives of academia, research, standard setting organisations and bodies with specific expertise such as national statistical offices, where relevant. Balanced representation of different geographical areas should be ensured. The determination of the membership should also aim to ensure the efficient functioning of the Board. The European Data Protection Board should be invited to appoint a representative to the European Data Innovation Board. 

(41) The European Data Innovation Board should support the Commission in coordinating national practices and policies on the topics covered by this Regulation, and in supporting cross-sector data use by adhering to the European Interoperability Framework (EIF) principles and through the utilisation of standards and specifications (such as the Core Vocabularies44 and the CEF Building Blocks45), without prejudice to standardisation work taking place in specific sectors or domains. Work on technical standardisation could include the identification of priorities for the development of standards and establishing and maintaining a set of technical and legal standards for transmitting data between two processing environments that allows data spaces to be organised without making recourse to an intermediary. The European Data Innovation Board should cooperate with sectoral bodies, networks or expert groups, or other cross-sectoral organisations dealing with re-use of data. Regarding data altruism, the European Data Innovation Board should assist the Commission in the development of the data altruism consent form, in consultation with the European Data Protection Board.

(42) In order to ensure uniform conditions for the implementation of this Regulation, implementing powers should be conferred on the Commission to develop the European data altruism consent form, to declare that the legal, supervisory and enforcement arrangements of a third country are adequate, to lay down special conditions applicable for transfers to third-countries of certain non-personal data categories deemed to be highly sensitive in specific Union acts adopted through a legislative procedure, and to support public sector bodies and re-users in their compliance with conditions for re-use set out in this Regulation by providing model contractual clauses. Those powers should be exercised in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council46.

(43) In order to provide for an efficient enforcement of this Regulation and to ensure that providers of data intermediation services as well as entities who wish to register as recognised data altruism organisations can access and complete the procedures of notification and registration fully online and in a cross-border manner, such procedures should be offered through the single digital gateway established pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2018/1724.33 These procedures should be added to the list of procedures included in Annex II of Regulation (EU) 2018/1724.

(44) This Regulation should not affect the application of the rules on competition, and in particular Articles 101 and 102 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union. The measures provided for in this Regulation should not be used to restrict competition in a manner contrary to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union. This concerns in particular the rules on the exchange of competitively sensitive information between actual or potential competitors through data intermediation services.

(45) The European Data Protection Supervisor and the European Data Protection Board were consulted in accordance with Article 42 of Regulation (EU) 2018/1725 of the European Parliament and of the Council (47)and delivered an opinion on [...].

(46) This Regulation respects the fundamental rights and observes the principles recognised in particular by the Charter, including the right to privacy, the protection of personal data, the freedom to conduct a business, the right to property and the integration of persons with disabilities. In the context of the latter, the public service bodies and services under this Regulation should, where relevant, comply with Directive (EU) 2019/88236 and Directive (EU) 2016/210237. Furthermore, Design for All in the context of information and communications technology, which is the conscious and systematic effort to proactively apply principles, methods and tools to promote universal design in computer-related technologies, including Internet-based technologies, thus avoiding the need for a posteriori adaptations, or specialised design, should be taken into account.

(47) Since the objectives of this Regulation, namely the re-use, within the Union, of certain categories of data held by public sector bodies as well as establishing a notification and supervisory framework for the provision of data sharing intermediation services and a framework for voluntary registration of entities which make data available for altruistic purposes, cannot be sufficiently achieved by the Member States, but can rather, by reason of its scale and effects, be better achieved at Union level, the Union may adopt measures, in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity as set out in Article 5 of the Treaty on European Union. In accordance with the principle of proportionality as set out in that Article, this Regulation does not go beyond what is necessary in order to achieve those objectives,

HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION:
